Attophysics
Joseph Maguire
Applied Physics 203
 
Abstract
Recent advancements have lead to the ability to generate controlled attosecond electron wave packets. These packets, created by illuminating atoms with high power ultrafast laser pulses, allow experimenters to probe matter at a very fundamental layer by illuminating targets with attosecond pulses and pulse trains. This allows the observation of dynamics at a very small physical scale with extremely high special and temporary resolution. With this new data, scientist can better understand electron dynamics as well as other super fast interactions. This paper will first discuss the physics behind attophysics then discuss current experiments utilizing this technique and finally conclude with future work.
Background
Attophysics is the branch of physics that studies phenomena that occur on the attosecond (1018 s) time scale. These phenomena include ultra small scale dynamics such as the movement of atoms and electrons. Numerous modern day problems demand a better understanding of these activities. Accordingly, the ability to measure these phenomena would lead to advancements a wide range of fields. In device physics, accurate attosecond measurements would lead to a better understanding of electron and hole movement through semiconductors. In atomic physics, the ability to study attosecond dynamics would lead to a better understanding of electron dynamics in excited atoms. Increased knowledge in this area could lead to innovations in a wide range of fields including X-Ray lasers (Krausz). 
But the field is not limited in possibilities to physics studies. The enormity of the applications is indeed astonishing ranging from the study of fast intermolecular dynamics in chemistry to X-Ray induced protein decay in biology.  But actual experiments in these areas demands advances that have not yet been made. So, as of now, due to the relative infancy of the field, the majority of current experiments are in atomic physics.
Generating Laser Pulses
In order to make measurements with attosecond time resolution, an attosecond light or electron source is needed. For years, creating a practical attosecond source proved difficult (Lewenstein). This is because pulses made from a summing laser outputs must be larger than the carrier frequency of a laser. This limitation becomes clear when a sinc function is used to represent a pulse. Shown in Figure 1, the width of the sinc function is roughly 1.5 times larger than the wavelength of the smallest component.
Figure 1: Pulse width exceeds fundamental frequency
For most laser pulse setups, the fundamental laser frequency is 800nm. This means the minimal pulse is on order femtoseconds. 
800nm/c*1.5=4fs
	If one used this technique to generate attosecond pulses, one would have to use a laser source with a nanometer wavelength. This corresponds to Soft X-Rays. However, Soft X-Ray lasers are prohibitively complex and expensive for most research applications (Lewenstein). 
Getting Around the Femtosecond Barrier
	To get around this barrier, physicists turned to other techniques for generating ultrafast pulses. One of the most prominent techniques involved using high power lasers to excite harmonics in noble gases. Through years of research, physicists were able to excite higher and higher modes in these atoms ultimately leading to the discovery of what is now called High Harmonic Generation. 
High Harmonic Generation
	The principle means for generating attosecond pulses, High Harmonic Generation or HHG, emerged through research done in the early 1990s. In a seminal paper published in The American Physical Society in 1993, Paul Corkum analyzed the effects of illuminating helium atoms with 5x1014W 800nm laser light. He argued that such an experiment could cause electrons ionized by the applied field to exit the atom and later recombine resulting in the emission of light (Corkum, 1993).  The novelty of this idea was that it created an XUV source with a widely available IR laser.  
	The illumination of the 800nm laser causes the electron exits the atom because, when the laser’s electric field is comparable to the atom’s electric field, the laser field strongly modifies the atom’s potential barrier (Smirnova).  The resulting potential, given by (1), allows for electrons to escape the atom through either tunnel ionization or over barrier ionization. Plots of the resulting potential and the corresponding electron liberation mechanisms are shown in Figure 2. 
V(r ?,t)= -e^2/(4pe_o r)+ e(E(t)) ?r ?      (1)
Figure 2: Effect of Strong Laser Field on Atomic Potential and Resulting Electron Liberation Techniques
Once the electron exits the atom, either through tunnel ionization or over barrier ionization, the laser field’s effect on the electron dominate the atom’s columbic electric field’s effect on the electron. This is because the newly ionized atom’s field is approximated to be significantly weaker than the applied laser field. As a result, the electron accelerates away from the atom. Upon field reversal, the electron accelerates in the direction of the atom. With non-negligible probability, the electron will recombine with the ion. In this case, the excess energy due to the acceleration of the electron in the laser field is emitted as a photon (Krzysztof). Because this process occurs during half cycles of the laser frequency (E ? -E), only the odd harmonics add coherently hence only odd harmonics are present in the emitted pulses. 
	It should be noted that this process is not without its limitations. The use of these pulses is limited by the phase mismatch between the harmonic and the exciting laser field. The combined effects of phase mismatch lead to significant harmonic distortion of the transmitted HHG light. On top of causing harmonic distortion in the resulting pulse, phase mismatch causes significant losses in conversion efficiency. This complicates generating photons with energies above 130eV (<300 attoseconds). However, recent research has shown that optically induced phase shifts can cause promising phase corrections at higher energies (Popmintchev).
Attosecond Wavepackets in Practice 
Pulse Trains
	In 2001 a team from the Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter (FOM), part of the Netherlands’ Organization for Scientific Research demonstrated the creation of attosecond pulse trains by combining HHG with the previously outlined techniques for pulse generation.
	In order to delay and recombine harmonics into a sinc function, the team used basic optical techniques. The light from HHG was filtered using an aperture. This relies on a general principle of light: at the far field, light from a lens forms a Spatial Fourier transform. Relying on this, the team used a simple ring aperture to block high harmonics. This is important because as noted earlier, phase mismatch becomes more prominent at extreme harmonics. After isolating several harmonics, the team phase delayed each harmonic and recombined them to form a sinc wave. This lead to a distinct train of 250as pulses on target(Paul).  
 
Imaging Uses
	The most immediately obvious use of an ultra short pulse train is to record images on an ultra short time scale. This goes back the idea of using strobe lights for high speed photography. A team from Lund University demonstrated attosecond imaging by combining Photoemission electron microscopy with an attosecond source. The experiment relied on the simple principle that an attosecond source could cause secondary election yield events in target metals. The exact procedure involved bombarding a sample of gold nano wires with a UV/EUV source. This bombardment caused secondary electron yield which was detected with nanosecond resolution by a PEEM detector. Since the XUV beam was an attosecond pulse train, the PEEM detector measured SEY events at attosecond intervals (Marsell).  The resulting images, albeit not as clear as images from a SEM, demonstrated that XUV-PEEM imaging is feasible.
Auger Decay
	A more extreme use of attophysics is inducing and measuring attosecond electron dynamics. An example of this is studying the Auger decay spectrum of a target atom. This technique results from the fact that attosecond pulse trains can both cause and measure Auger decay (Buth). The process starts when excitations of EUV radiation could cause deeply bound electrons to eject from the atom. This leaves the atom in an unstable state. As the electron relaxes into the unoccupied state, emission occurs. Emission within the first femtoseconds corresponds to radiationless Auger decay. So, using a simple femtosecond probe, one can detect theses emissions (Zherebtsov). 
	A team in 2002 demonstrated this technique experimentally measuring Auger decay of Kr excited by an attosecond pulse train (Drescher). The team illuminated a KR source with a EUV pulse causing deeply bound electrons to eject from their parent atoms. After these electrons were ejected from the Kr atoms, a delayed probe from a femtosecond source illuminated them. This caused a change in electron momentum dependent on the amplitude and of the probing signal. By modifying the delay time of the probe, the experiments altered the momentum transfer to the electrons. Immediately adjacent to the setup was a time of flight spectrometer. After sweeping over a wide range of time delays, the experimenters were able to record the KE distribution of the auger decay (Drescher).   
Future Work
Higher energies and shorter pulses
Current experiments with multiple pulses are limited to single frequency pulse trains. For better understanding materials, more complex waveforms like chirps are needed. This is because the ability to generate a chirp beginning in the EUV would allow high precision frequency domain measurements. However, current ability is limited because it is difficult to generate pulses of high energies and shorter pulse periods (Kling).
Limitations in pulse energy also make it difficult to perform time-resolved spectroscopy with attosecond pulse trains. The described Auger decay experiment used a powerful femtosecond pulse to probe the ejected electrons. This source’s intensity allowed for the researchers to rely on the Strong Field Approximation. Currently, attosecond sources are much weaker. Higher energy (and intensity) attosecond pulse trains would allow experiments to use XUV to probe measurements (Kling).
 
Conclusion 
The use of HHG to generate attosecond pulses has made attosecond resolution measurements viable to the wider scientific community. This new capability has already yielded results in a variety of area from measuring ultra fast electron dynamics in Auger decay to imagining nanoscale objects at attosecond temporal resolution. However, more work is needed to make attophysics a mature field and to expand its applications. High energy harmonics are often out of phase with the carrier leading to extremely low energy conversion rates. These higher energy harmonics are needed to generate attosecond chirps as well as conduct attosecond XUV pump-attosecond XUV probe experiments. The field is rapidly advancing so there is great hope that limitations will soon be overcome.
