
BENEDETTO CROCE, I talian Senator, former Minister for Public I nstruction, author of "Filosofia dello Spirito,"
a philosophic s\stem translated into man\ languages
BET WEEN the orderly Europe that w e used to know  and the distracted Europe of today is fixed the great gulf of the
World War. We remember the old Europe w ith its riches, its flourishing trade, its abundance of goods, its ease of
life, its bold sense of security;  w e see today the new  Europe -- impov erished, discouraged, crisscrossed w ith high
tariff w alls, each nation occupied solely w ith its ow n affairs, too distraught to pay heed to the things of the spirit and
tormented by the fear of w orse to come. Gone is the gay international society once the pride of Europe's capitals;
extinct, or almost so, is the old community of thought, art, civ ilization. How  many astounding changes there hav e been
in frontiers and in political relationships!  I n the place of the Germany of the Hohenzollerns w e see the German
Republic;  A ustria-Hungary has been dismembered and cut up into new  states;  French sw ay has been resstablished ov er
the prov inces lost in 1870, and the I talian frontiers now  include the unredeemed territories and extend to the Brenner;
Poland has been reconstituted;  Russia is ruled, not by the T sars but by the Sov iets;  and the United States has become a
dominant factor in European policy.
Y et if w e pass from externals to essentials and try to identify the controlling forces now  at w ork, w e soon discern that
these tw o Europes, so dissimilar in appearance, hav e continuity and homogeneity. When w e leav e out superficial
impressions and make a careful analysis w e detect the same characteristics in both, though in the Europe of today
they hav e been exaggerated by the w ar. T he same procliv ities and the same spiritual conflicts are there, though
aggrav ated by the general intellectual decay w hich w as to be expected after a w ar w hich counted its v ictims by the
millions, accustomed its surv iv ors to v iolence, and destroyed the habit of critical, constructiv e and concentrated
mental labor.
Nationalistic and imperialistic impulses hav e seized the v ictorious nations because they are v ictors, and the
v anquished because they are v anquished;  w hile the new  states add new  nationalisms, new  imperialisms to the list.
I mpatience w ith free institutions has led to open or masked dictatorships, and, w here dictatorships do not exist, to the
desire for them. Liberty, w hich before the w ar w as a faith, or at least a routine acceptance, has now  departed from the

hearts of men ev en if it still surv iv es in certain institutions. I n its place is an atav istic libertarism w hich more than
ev er ponders disorder and destruction, giv es rein to extrav agant impulses, and produces spectacular and sterile w orks.
I ndifferent and contemptuous, its follow ers scorn meditativ e and lov ing labor, labor w ith a rev erent affection for the
past and a courageous mastery of the future. T hey scorn actions w hich spring from the heart and speak to the heart,
speculations w hich hold the germs of truth, history based on a realization of all that man has achiev ed by painful
struggle, poetry w hich is beautiful.
Under the name of socialism, communism had already been introduced into the political life and institutions of
Europe before the w ar. Now  it has reappeared, crude and disruptiv e. Liberalism it ridicules as something naiv ely
moralistic. Like atav ism, into w hich it often blends, this communism is a sterile thing that kills thought, religion and
art: seeking to subjugate them to its ow n purposes, it can only destroy them. A ll the distortions and decrepit
sophistries of historical materialism hav e reappeared in the current opinions and theories of the day as if they w ere
new  and full of promise, although any man w ith a slight know ledge of criticism and the history of ideas passed
judgment upon them long ago. T hey hav e taken on an air of nov elty and modernness merely because, although
originally introduced by Europe to Russia, they now  come out of Russia;  if anything they are more immature and
shallow  than ev er;  but in this age of unprecedented callow ness and crudity they gain unprecedented credence.
Catholicism, moreov er, w hich before the w ar sought to draw  new  strength from the forces of irrationalism and
mysticism, has been gathering into its fold many w eak and bew ildered souls. T hus once again is heard that chorus of
pessimism and decadence w hich echoed through pre-w ar literature, this time announcing the decline of w estern
civ ilization and of the human race itself. A ccording to these prophets it is about to sink back to the lev el of beasts
after hav ing failed to reach the estate of man.
A ll these are facts, and it is useless to deny them or to say that they are true only of certain people in certain
countries. Like the situation from w hich they spring they are common to all Europe and all the w orld. A nd since they
are facts, they must hav e a function to fill in the dev elopment of the human spirit and in social and human progress --if not as direct creators of new  v alues, then at least as resources and stimuli for the deepening and broadening of old
v alues. T his function, w hatev er it may be, w ill be understood and described only by the future historian. He w ill hav e
before him as a completed story the mov ement in w hich w e are now  inv olv ed and its subsequent dev elopments. We
cannot understand it or ev en attempt to describe it as a w hole because w e are part of it. Being in it, mov ing w ith it, w e
can, it is true, observ e and understand many of its aspects, but that is all.
A nd w hat practical moral is there for each of us in the fact that w e cannot know  the future? T his: that w e must take
part in w hat is going on about us, and not w aste our forces in the contemplation of the unknow able, that w e must act,
to the degree that each of us can, as our conscience and duty command. T hose w ho in disregard of the ancient
admonition of Solon striv e to understand and judge a life " before it is finished,"  and w ho lose themselv es in
conjecture and surmise, should be on their guard lest these digressions into the unknow n prov e a snare set by a bad
demon to keep them from their goal.
Not "  a history of the future"  (as the old thinkers used to define prophecy), but a history of the past w hich is summed
up in the present, is w hat w e need for our w ork, for our action. A nd w hat w e need most at the moment is to examine,
or at least to rev iew , those ideals w hich are generally accepted today. We must discov er w hether they contain the
pow er to dissolv e or surpass or correct the ideals w hich w e ourselv es hold;  so that thereafter w e may change or
modify our ideals, and in any ev ent resstablish them upon a surer, sounder foundation.

T he ideal of a transcendental system of truth, and, corollary to it, of a system of gov ernment from on high, exercised
on earth by a v icar and represented by a church, has not yet acquired the intellectual proof w hich past ages found it to
lack. Like all obv ious statements this one runs the risk of seeming ungenerous. None the less, it is a fact that the
spiritual impulse w hich has prompted many persons to return to Catholicism or to take refuge in it (or in similar if
less v enerable and authoritativ e hav ens) is merely a crav ing, amid the turmoil of clashing and changing ideals, for a
truth that is fixed and a rule of life that is imposed from abov e. I n some cases it may hav e no nobler basis than fear and
renunciation, a childish terror in the presence of the perception that all truth is absolute and at the same time relativ e.
But a moral ideal cannot conform to the needs of the discouraged and the fearful.
Nor can a moral ideal conform to the purposes of those w ho are drunk w ith action for action's sake;  for action thus
conceiv ed leav es only nausea, a profound indifference tow ard all that has stirred the human race, and an incapacity for
objectiv e w ork. Humanity has drunk deep of nationalism and imperialism and the taste of them is already bitter as
gall: inYeni amariorem felle. T hose w ho lov e action for its ow n sake still rage on. But w here is their serenity of soul,
their joy in life? T he best of them are env eloped in gloom;  the great mass of them are merely raw  and stupid.
Communism, it is the fashion to claim, has passed from theory to practice and is being applied in Russia. But it is
being practised not as communism but -- in keeping w ith its inner contradiction -- as a form of autocracy, as its
critics had alw ays predicted w ould be the case. Under it the people of Russia are denied ev en that faint breath of
freedom w hich they managed to obtain under the autocracy of the T sars. T he abolition of the State, that " transition
from the rpgime of necessity to the rpgime of liberty"  about w hich Marx theorized, has not taken place. Communism
has not abolished the State -- it could not and nev er w ill be able to do so -- but, as irony w ould hav e it, has forged for
itself one of the most oppressiv e state systems w hich it is possible to imagine. I n saying this w e are not trying to deny
that perhaps there w ere circumstances w hich forced the Russian rev olutionists to choose the course they did and no
other. Neither do w e w ish to detract from the immensity of their endeav ors to dev elop, under these circumstances,
the productiv e forces of the country. Neither do w e minimize the importance of the lessons to be learned from their
endeav ors, or fail to admire the mystic enthusiasm, materialistic though it be, w hich inspires them and keeps them
from sinking beneath the load w hich they hav e put on their ow n backs. I t is this enthusiasm w hich giv es them courage
to trample on religion, thought, poetry, on ev erything in a w ord w hich w e in the West rev ere as sacred or noble.
Nev ertheless the Russian Communists hav e not solv ed, nor w ill their v iolent and repressiv e methods ev er enable them
to solv e, the fundamental problem of human society, the problem of freedom. For in freedom only can human society
flourish and bear fruit. Freedom alone giv es meaning to life: w ithout it life is unbearable. Here is an inescapable
problem. I t cannot be eliminated. I t springs from the v ery v itals of things and stirs in the souls of all those countless
human beings w hom the Communists are trying to control and reshape in accordance w ith their arbitrary concepts.
A nd on the day that this problem is faced, the materialistic foundations of the Sov iet structure w ill crumble and new
and v ery different supports w ill hav e to be found for it. T hen, ev en as now , pure communism w ill not be practised in
Russia.
Outside of Russia this pseudo-communism has not gained much ground in spite of the fascination that alw ays attaches
to things remote in time and space -- as the old adage has it, maior e longinqXo reYerenWia. T w o conditions present
in Russia are indeed lacking in Western and Central Europe: the T sarist tradition and mysticism. Miliukov  w as not far
from the truth w hen he w rote of Lenin some tw elv e or more years ago that " in Russia he w as building on the solid
foundations of the good old autocratic tradition, but that as far as other countries w ere concerned he w as merely
building castles in the air."  Ev en if such experiments should dev elop in other parts of Europe, the fact that other


countries differ so from Russia in religion, civ ilization, education, customs, traditions -- in historical background, in
short -- w ould produce something quite new , w hatev er its name and appearance;  or else, after an indeterminate period
of blind groping and struggle, there w ould sooner or later emerge that liberty w hich is only another name for
humanity.
For liberty is the only ideal w hich unites the stability that Catholicism once possessed w ith the flexibility w hich it
could nev er attain, the only ideal w hich faces the future w ithout proposing to mould it to some particular form, the
only ideal that can surv iv e criticism and giv e human society a fixed point by w hich from time to time to resstablish its
balance. T here are those w ho question the future of the ideal of freedom. T o them w e answ er that it has more than a
future: it has eternity. A nd today, despite the contempt and ridicule heaped upon it, liberty still endures in many of our
institutions and customs and still exercises a beneficent influence upon them. More significant still, it abides in the
hearts and minds of many noble men all ov er the w orld, men w ho though scattered and isolated, reduced to a small but
aristocratic UeV pXblica liWeUaUia, still keep faith w ith it, rev erently hallow  its name, and lov e it more truly than ev er
they did in the days w hen no one denied or questioned its absolute sov ereignty, w hen the mob proclaimed its glory
and contaminated it w ith a v ulgarity of w hich it is now  purged.
A nd not only does freedom abide in such men, and not only does it exist and persist in the constitutions of many
important countries and in institutions and customs. I ts v irtue is operativ e in things themselv es and is gradually
opening a w ay through many difficulties. We see it at w ork in the present w ish for a truce in suspicions, a reduction in
armaments and a peaceful settlement among the nations of Europe. T hat this is true is apparent in the general feeling
that somehow  these nations must contriv e to harmonize their plans and efforts if they are to retain not their political
and economic supremacy only, but ev en their leadership as creators of civ ilization and the aptitudes for this unending
task w hich they hav e acquired through centuries of labor and experience.
Disarmament and w orld peace are the only statesmanlike projects among the many put forw ard since the w ar w hich
hav e not faded out or been dissipated;  rather are they gaining ground from year to year and conv erting many w ho w ere
once antagonistic or incredulous or faint-hearted. We are entitled to hope that they w ill not be allow ed to fail but w ill
be carried forw ard to fulfilment in the face of all opposition. I t is true that the World War, w hich future historians
may w ell regard as the UedXcWio ad abVXUdXm of nationalism, has embittered the relations of certain states as a result
of an unjust and foolish peace treaty;  but it also has made the peoples aw are in their innermost consciousness that
they hav e common v irtues and defects, common strengths and w eaknesses, that they share a common destiny, are
inspired by the same affections, afflicted by the same sorrow s, glory in the same patrimony of ideals. T his explains
w hy already in all parts of Europe w e are w itnessing the birth of a new  consciousness, a new  nationality -- for nations
are not, as has been imagined, data of nature but results of conscious acts, historical formations. Just as sev enty years
ago the Neapolitans and the Piedmontese decided to become I talians, not by abjuring their original nationality but by
exalting and merging it in the new  one, so Frenchmen and Germans and I talians and all the others w ill rise to
becoming Europeans;  they w ill think as Europeans, their hearts w ill beat for Europe as they now  do for their smaller
countries, not forgetting them but lov ing them the better.
T his process of amalgamation is directly opposed to competitiv e nationalism and w ill in time destroy it entirely;
meanw hile it tends to free Europe from the psychology of nationalism and its attendant habits of thought and action. I f
and w hen this happens, the liberal ideal w ill again prev ail in the European mind and resume its sw ay ov er European
hearts. But w e must not see in this rebirth of liberalism merely a w ay to bring back the " old times"  for w hich the
Romantics idly yearn. Present ev ents, those still to take place, w ill hav e their due effect;  certain institutions of the old

liberalism w ill hav e to be modified and replaced by ones better adapted to their tasks;  new  gov erning classes, made up
of different elements, w ill arise;  and experience w ill bring forth new  concepts and giv e a new  direction to the popular
w ill.
I n this new  mental and moral atmosphere it w ill be imperativ e to take up again the so-called " social"  problems. T hey
are certainly not of recent making;  thinkers and statesmen hav e struggled w ith them for centuries, dealing w ith them
as they arose, case by case and in the spirit of the times. During the nineteenth century they w ere the object of deep
attention and most heroic remedies, and w ere dealt w ith in such a w ay as to improv e greatly the conditions of the
w orking classes, to raise their standards of liv ing and to better their legal and moral status. " Planned"  economy, as it is
now  being called, although it holds a foremost position in talk today is not essentially new ;  and the question cannot be
seriously raised of finding a collectiv e substitute for indiv idual economy or free indiv idual initiativ e, both of
themselv es necessary to human life and economic progress. Discussion can turn only on the proportions, great or
small, to be assigned to one form of economic organization rather than to another, differing w ith different means,
places, times and other circumstances. T his is primarily a question for technical experts and statesmen, w ho w ill hav e
to dev ise solutions suitable to the times and fav orable to an increase of w ealth and its more equitable distribution. I t is
a question for experts and statesmen;  but they w ill be unable to fulfil their function or attain their ends unless liberty
be there to prepare and maintain the intellectual and moral atmosphere indispensable to labors so arduous, and to
quicken the legal systems w ithin w hich their duties must be performed.