Suvorexant has the onset, but it has the great maintenance, especially in the last third of the night, where other drugs fail.” And even though suvorexant keeps working longer than Ambien, suvorexant patients don’t feel groggier afterward, as you might expect. Jed Black, a sleep specialist at Stanford’s medical school who has worked in the pharmaceutical industry, recently recalled being visited by Ambien salespeople: “They would say to me, with a very straight face—and I think they believed it completely—‘This is not a benzodiazepine, and therefore it’s safer.’ ” Ambien did send people to sleep quickly, and the human body broke it down after a few hours, so there was a limited hangover effect. As Black recalled, “Everybody switched allegiance—most physicians did—and then nothing came along that was any better.” Customers were satisfied, because the drug reliably induced sleep, and, as Black noted, sleep drugs that target GABA receptors “impart a sense of feeling a little less stressed, like you’ve had a drink or two.” And Ambien, in common with many other drugs, can be tricky for some patients to give up. Or, to quote from the label of a bottle of sleep medication used by Tina Fey’s character, Liz Lemon, on “30 Rock”: “May cause dizziness, sexual nightmares, and sleep crime.” Zolpidem enters the gut, passes into the bloodstream, squeezes through the liver, and then crosses the blood-brain barrier, to make GABA receptors more receptive to gaba. As Mignot put it, “This was druggable.” (That is often not the case: researchers know the genetic cause of Huntington’s disease but have nothing to target.) A drug that activated orexin receptors might help treat narcoleptics, and a drug that blocked orexin receptors, if introduced to a brain producing orexin at unwelcome times, might help insomniacs, perhaps without intoxicating them. Renger, upon his arrival at Merck, had set up a sleep laboratory that could make very fast, semiautomated measurements of the sleep patterns of rodents and monkeys. This emphasis on the subjective also makes the amnesiac effect of sleep drugs oddly advantageous to those who manufacture them: the drugs inhibit people from creating memories of waking during the night. The Phase II results showed that, at ten milligrams, suvorexant had an effect that could be measured in a sleep lab, but the dose had no advantage over a placebo in the subjective measures—patients’ estimations of their own speed in falling asleep, subsequent wakefulness in bed, and total sleep time. The paper described an experiment involving rodents and monkeys dosed with Ambien, Valium, Lunesta, and a Merck compound called DORA-22—another orexin antagonist that Merck made alongside suvorexant. The dora-22 study first established the amount of each drug necessary to send the animals to sleep, and then—using cognitive tests like the red-square game—measured the extent to which the drugs, soon after ingestion, affected memory and attention span. He began one sentence, in an innocent tone, “I think we don’t want to raise concerns that suvorexant causes narcolepsy by causing an autoimmune death of cells that produce orexins.” He also took a moment to undermine the importance of subjective results, saying, “Everybody knows that sleep interferes with your ability to know how much time you’ve slept.” John Carroll, an industry analyst, tweeted that the meeting was a “disaster” for Merck.