IT WAS a big week for Wang Wei. On a recent Wednesday she had two weddings to attend, then on Saturday, two funerals. Each involved a banquet, and by custom she was obliged to bring cash gifts. That was no hardship a decade ago, when the going rate for four banquets was the equivalent of $5-10. And a decade before that, she would have just brought rice or corn from the family plot.

It is a hardship now. The cost of gift-giving in rural China has gone up much faster than incomes. This week Ms Wang’s outlays added up to 350 yuan, or close to $60—about a month’s income. A pleasant, open-faced woman of 41, she says it is money she could have used to buy basic appliances. A water heater would be nice, she says, so her husband, in-laws and two teenage children wouldn’t have to boil water to bathe. A fridge would be splendid. But these are extravagances. Giving gifts for big occasions is an inescapable, and increasingly onerous, obligation for hundreds of millions of China’s farmers.

Much attention has been paid recently to gift-giving in urban China. In the past year the Communist Party under Xi Jinping has cracked down on excessive official banqueting. Such unseemly displays of consumption are well-known opportunities for bribery. But the banqueting culture in rural and small-town China is a more vexing problem. If officials’ lavish parties are a symbol of social inequality, they are not a significant cause of it. The gift-giving practices of everyday weddings (such as the one pictured above), funerals and milestone birthdays are doing much more to deepen actual inequality.

Exchanging gifts at such occasions has been a part of village life in China for centuries. The practice survived Mao’s political campaigns and indeed took on more importance. Yunxiang Yan, an anthropologist at UCLA, observes that Mao’s attacks on clans as bases of power broadened the network of gift-giving to friends and, in the post-Mao reform era, to guanxi, or connections, outside the village. As Chinese incomes rose, the widening networks for giving gifts—and the obligation never to give less than you last received—have fed a sharp upward spiral in gift amounts, a ruinous development for the poor.

An academic study of gift-giving in Guizhou, a poor south-western province, found that from 2005 to 2009 average gift amounts in three rural villages grew by 18-45% annually, compared with 10% annual income growth. The average share of income spent on gifts more than doubled—from 8% to 17%—while the share of income spent on food dropped, from 48% to 42%. One of the study’s authors, Xi Chen of the Yale School of Public Health, concluded that this had a detrimental impact on antenatal health, as poor pregnant mothers cut back on food to keep pace with gift-giving.

The root of the problem is that the social model of rural gift-giving ignores income, and conforming is not simply a matter of saving face. The rural poor continue to give even when they cannot afford it, says Mr Yan, because of a powerful imperative of renqing, or personal feelings. Failure to fulfil the obligation of reciprocity, or to show consideration for others’ feelings and emotional responses, is regarded as “an immoral act and thus a violation of renqing ethics,” he says.

The burden imposed by renqing is a painfully public one, since the giving is done publicly. At a typical banquet guests line up to give cash at a reception table, where someone records the amount and the name of the guest in the family’s gift ledger. No matter how little you earn, you are expected to give the prevailing amount. And if your guanxi with the host is close, you must give more, regardless of income.

The careful record-keeping system also puts pressure on people to match previous gifts, a dynamic that ensures the prevailing standard will only keep rising. Any factor that channels more income to some in a village but not all—migrant workers’ remittances, a windfall from government compensation for using local land, or, as with some of Ms Wang’s neighbours, from farming a cash crop like tobacco—increases the obligations for everyone. In Popu village, where the average annual income is less than $1,000, close friends and relatives must give at least 100 yuan ($16), compared with 10 or 20 yuan a decade ago.

There is not necessarily a benefit for those who host banquets either: the study on which Mr Chen worked found that banquet expenses have increased too. They can cost the hosts several times as much as they collect in gifts. Still, some banquets can be moneymakers, and in bigger towns there are more of them, with many more guests, than in the past: 80th birthdays, one-month birthdays for babies, parties for children going to college, housewarmings. (In the mountains of Hubei province, some farmers hold banquets when their pigs give birth.)

If Ms Wang wants to try earning her money back, she is out of luck for now, lacking an occasion. Her oldest son is 17, and sons are costly to marry off anyway: the bride’s family expects a house in the bargain. She has not held a banquet since 2005—when her family moved into its new house—and the take was a pittance, a few hundred dollars before expenses.

She expects she will give more in gifts this year (perhaps $1,000 in all) than she earns in income from odd jobs and farming her third of an acre of corn and rice, and that she will have to borrow to make up the difference. Attending banquets without giving is not an option, she says. Not attending is the only way to avoid giving. That is possible in big cities, where relations are more fragmented, but not in a village, says Ms Wang. The ties that bind more tightly can pinch more tightly too.