IT CAME out of a clear blue sky. On November 23rd China declared a huge swathe of the airspace above the East China Sea henceforth to be part of a new Chinese “Air Defence Identification Zone”, or ADIZ: all aircraft intending to enter the zone had to file flight plans with the Chinese authorities, maintain radio communications and follow whatever instructions Chinese controllers chose to issue. Otherwise, China warned ominously, they risked it taking “defensive emergency measures”.

Japan’s two main airlines, whose commercial flights traverse this newly designated area dozens of times a day, rushed to comply with the new rules. But then it was America’s turn to surprise, when the Pentagon let slip that two of its B-52 bombers had flown into the zone, over the Senkaku islands, on November 26th on what it claimed was part of regular exercises in the area. The planes had followed “normal procedures”, a spokesman said, which included “not filing flight plans, not radioing ahead and not registering our [radio] frequencies”. Suddenly, the prospect loomed of a stand-off between the world’s superpower and Asia’s emerging great power.

China insists it is doing nothing unusual in establishing an air-defence zone. America, Canada and Japan, among others, have had them since the early days of the cold war, when countries were anxious to defend themselves in good time against Soviet warplanes and nuclear missiles. Yet the United States, for one, only insists that aircraft identify themselves if they intend to enter American airspace; planes simply passing through the zone (which extends well beyond territorial limits) do not have to. China, on the other hand, insists that all aircraft in the new ADIZ abide by its new rules.

More provocatively, China’s ADIZ covers the uninhabited Senkaku islands, which China calls the Diaoyu. Japan has held these since the late 19th century, but since the 1970s they have been claimed by China. In September 2012 the Japanese government bought from their private owner three of the five islands it did not already own. China claimed the move was an anti-China conspiracy, and set out to undermine Japan’s control of the islands, first by using incursions of surveillance vessels, and later patrol aircraft, to which Japan’s Self-Defence Forces have responded by scrambling fighter jets. Recently, an unmanned Chinese drone flew over the islands. When Japan threatened to shoot down the next drone that came its way, a Chinese general insisted that would be an act of war.


The latest move represents a significant ratcheting-up of China’s challenge to Japanese control of the Senkakus. The new zone increases the risk of military escalation, accidental or otherwise. In future China may think that the zone forms the basis to take action against Japanese aircraft operating in the zone. Not only does the ADIZ cover Japanese-held territory, it also overlaps significantly with Japan’s own air-defence zone (see map). Meanwhile, running uncomfortably close to both Taiwan (which also claims the Senkakus) and South Korea, it has alarmed those neighbours too. An adviser to Shinzo Abe, the Japanese prime minister, calls it a “whole new game” and the biggest challenge in memory to freedom of movement in or above the East China Sea. Japan lodged a strong protest, which was rebuffed. Australia, South Korea and Taiwan have also expressed concerns. Chuck Hagel, America’s defence secretary, said China’s move was a “destabilising attempt to alter the status quo in the region”.

The decision to respond with an overflight of the B-52s, an official in Tokyo insists, was a joint understanding with Japan. China, meanwhile, says that it monitored the (unarmed) bombers, but claimed that they flew only along the “eastern edge” of its zone. The claim may be a way of saving face at home. Yet nothing suggests China is having second thoughts about its new ADIZ. Shi Yinhong of Renmin University in Beijing says it marks China’s first action since the Communist Party came to power in 1949 that “substantially expands its strategic space” on the western rim of the Pacific. Countries in South-East Asia with whom China has maritime disputes, notably the Philippines and Vietnam, wonder whether China will now impose an ADIZ over the South China Sea in a bid to turn it into a Chinese lake too.

For now, China’s move throws into question the depth of President Xi Jinping’s desire for a “new type of great power relationship” with America. Barack Obama seemed to get on well with Mr Xi when they met for a two-day personal summit in June, but he cannot have envisaged having to dispatch two bombers as a warning six months later. Some better sense of how the two countries intend to handle matters will come with a visit to China in early December by the vice-president, Joe Biden.

Mr Shi acknowledges that the zone has raised tensions, but predicts that Washington and Tokyo will badly want to avoid “too much risk of conflict”—ie, America and Japan will back off and accept the new situation. But that seems wishful thinking—as does a growing view among Chinese policymakers that fear of conflict with China will push America to weaken its long-held commitment to underwrite Japan’s security. In this view, America will push Japan into an accommodation with China, first, by acknowledging the existence of a territorial dispute.

Yet on the contrary, a more assertive America and Japan is now more likely. Bonnie Glaser of the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think-tank, notes that flights such as the one taken by the B-52s this week are only the latest act in a long history of America’s proving the freedom of navigation in international skies and waters. (And it seems to have reassured the Japanese commercial airlines, which after lobbying by their government, announced that they would not be following Chinese rules in future.) In Tokyo, defence guidelines, to be released at the end of the year, appear likely to articulate a new policy of patrolling the seas and skies around the Senkaku islands around the clock, rather than intermittently, as now. The stakes have just got a whole lot higher.